# Conclusions {#sec:conclusions}

At their finest, public opinion polls inform political elites and the
wider public about the political preferences of voters. In this role,
they are an instrument that politicians can use to be responsive to
the electorate by shifting policies in the direction of what their
constituents want. At their worst, polls mislead the public debate if
items that do not correspond with the true status of the public
opinion are strategically introduced through them by strategic
political actors. The distance between these two extremes is measured
by the methodological decisions taken by the data providers.
Regardless of whether bad polls are the result of willful deception or
the product of inadequate decisions during data collection and data
analysis, what all bad polls have in common is that they do not meet
the standards that are expected from a tool of scientific research.

In the absence of a regulatory body that validates what individual
pollsters do, transparency---even more than rigor---is the only way
through which data consumers (the electorate) can critically evaluate
whether the results that are reported are plausible and, consequently
to react appropriately to unsound and even deceptive polls. In the
context of private pollsters with legitimate claims to the protection
of the specifics of their process, transparency in polls cannot
conform to the high standards of reproducible research. On the other
hand, reputation alone---oftentimes measure only through the frequency
with which they correctly forecast electoral results---is insufficient
to guarantee the accountability of actors that play a role in shaping
public opinion. A balance must be stricken that combines

This paper outlined an approach to the tasks of imputing past and
intended behavior in Spanish opinion polls that relies on predictive
modeling. As a data-driven alternative to the more common rule-based
imputation, the methodology makes better use of the information in the
full questionnaire while at the same time is less reliant on _ad-hoc_
rules. More important, from the perspective of transparency in public
opinion research, is that it facilitates reproducibility from first
principles if researchers are given access to microdata.

The results of the predictive models lend partial empirical support to
the strategy of the CIS of basing off their estimation on _"voto más
simpatía,"_ but paint a richer picture. Political behavior appears
driven by other factors, like past behavior, the perceived ideological
distance to the parties or the evaluation of the government and the
opposition, that are far from surprising at the light of the voting
behavior literature. Also unsurprisingly, in spite of the attention
given by general media, sociodemographic variables play virtually no
role in the predictions.

The current approach also comes with a number of limitations. Some of
them are the result of the questionnaire not being designed for the
type of applications that I suggested here. For instance, the
performance likely voter model could be improved with access to a
richer battery of screener questions. Instead, the models had to rely
to one response category in the vote intention question. Similarly,
changes to the design of the questionnaire in different field
iterations make it difficult to identify an ideal common set of
variables that can be used throughout a long span of time.

More generally, it can be argued that the ideal situation would be one
in which the questionnaire structure could be adapted to make better
use of predictive models. For instance, an inspection of the
systematic errors that the models may be making could inform the
redesign of the survey instrument. The difficulties that the models
above face when trying to classify voters from the smaller parties is
an illustration of the kind of items that could be added to the
instrument.

The most important limitation is that the approach suggested here
relies on an analogy assumption between voters and non-voters. In
practice, it means that non-reporters in the sample are similar to
those who do report their voting preference and that therefore
information about how reporters behavior can be used to make
predictions about non-reporters. The assumption is by no means
exclusive of a predictive approach but it does become more obvious
within this framework.

# Bibliography 
